# DART Fundamental concepts

This document covers the Dart's data types, basic operators, variable types, data
structures, and basic statements.

Play around with `Dart` code in [this link](https://dartpad.dev/).

## 1 - `Dart`'s basic data definitions
### 1.1 Variable types

Dart stores all data in memory, and all declared variables are saved as pointers to the
location in memory where the data is stored.

It is always good practice to be as explicit as possible with our intentions for
variables so we do not screw up our code.

```dart
var variableName
```
- this statement tells Dart that the variable associated to `variableName` can change
  during the course of our program. It is a 'runtime variable' (the value associated to
  it can change during runtime).

```dart
void variableName
```
- this statement, in Dart, indicates an 'empty' pointer to memory (allows to tell the
  program that we do not need anything to be stored in memory, such as for functions
  not returning anything).

```dart
final variableName
```
- `final` indicates the variable will not change once the part of code depending from it
  gets run (it is a runtime constant value). In Flutter, for example, we can use a
  'final string' to generate the content of a Stateless Widget. When the code is
  compiled, the variable is unknown, but when the widget is created, the variable gets
  allocated and it never changes, it is 'final'.

```dart
const variableName
```
- `const` are 'complile-time' constants. That means that the variable gets allocated at
  compile time (does not need to wait until the code is run). That allows Dart to raise
  an error if it detects that we try to associate the name to another variable.

```dart
enum variableName {'apple', 'orange'}
```
- enumerations are variables that can accept a value within a set of pre-defined ones.
  (on the example above, for example, the variable can only be 'apple' or 'orange').
  Enumerations are useful to be sure that the code behaves as it should, and increase
  the runtime at compiling vs a single string.

> Note: behind the scenes, enumerations map each of the values to an integer index
> [0, 1, 2, ...]

Example of a plausible `Dart` code:
```dart
var a = const 123
```
- this specific code is telling Dart that the variable '123' will be constant at
  runtime, and therefore unchanged. On the other side,  'a' is variable, and we will
  not see an error if 'a' is set equal to another value.

### 1.2 Data types and operators
#### Data types

The following data types are supported in `Dart`:
- `String`: (with a capital S) string datatype. It is defined with single or double
  brackets: `"this is a string"`, and `'this is also a string'`
- `int`: integer datatype
- `double`: 'double' or 'float' datatype
- `num`: dynamic 'numeric' value which accepts both 'int' and 'double'
- `List`: (with capital L) list datatype
- `List<int>`: list of integers
- `bool`: Boolean datatype

#### Operators

These are the basic operators in `Dart`:
- `=`: 'equal to', sets a variable equal to something
- `==`: 'is equal to?', boolean condition
- `!=` 'is not equal to?', boolean expression
- `>`: 'greater than?' boolean expression
- `<`: 'smaller than?' boolean expression
- `>=`: 'greater or equal than?' boolean expression
- `<=`: 'smaller or equal than?' boolean expression
- `&&`: 'and' boolean statement
- `||`: 'or' boolean statement

#### Data special values

```dart
null
```
- `null` is an empty value in Dart (similar to `None` in Python), that means the
  variable does not point to any value in memory (yet), the variable is in an
  uninitialized state.


### 1.3 Defining variables
```dart
var newVariable;
```
- creates a `new_variable`. The command 'var' tells Dart to allocate a space in memory
  for the variable defined. A better practice is to define the data type if no value is
  associated, as shown below.

```dart
int new_varible;
double new_varible;
```
- these statements aboce are better ways to define new `int` or `double` variables.
  Good practice: define data type if no value is assigned on the line it is defined.

```dart
var newVarible = 8;
```
- defines variable and sets it up to a value. Note that in here we do not need the
  `int` keyword since the value is specified, and `Dart` will understand that
  `newVariable` is of type `int`. Good practice: use the `var` keyword if we specify
  value assigned.

```dart
const newVariable
```
- defines a constant. It is good practice to set up `const` if we do not intend to
  change the variable, (will make our code easier to debug)

### 1.4 `Dart` predefined objects

In this chapter we take a look into `Dart`'s built-in objects: Lists and Maps.

#### 1.4.1 Lists
##### List definition

Lists are objects containing any type of data: `['this','is','a','list',]` (the
contents of a list can be any combination of the Data types)

`Dart` allows us to strictly define lists, by allowing a specific data type inside of it:
```dart
<String>['this','is','a','list','with','only','strings']
```
- The `<String>` keyword allows us to tell Dart that the list should only accept strings on it.

##### Indexing

Indexing in `Dart` is similar to programming languages like Python:
- `list[i]` outputs the (i-1)th element of the list (indexes start at zero)
- `list[i:k]` outputs the (i-1)th element of the list until the (k-1)th

##### List functions
```dart
list.map(function);
```
- iterates through the list, creating an iterable object (same size), applying
  'function' element-wise. Example: `list.map((i) {i*2});` returns a list with all
  elements multiplied by 2.

```dart
list.length;
```
- returns the length of the list

```dart
list.add(new_element);
```
- adds `new_element` at the end of the list (same as Python's `.append()`)

```dart
iterable.toList();
```
- transforms iterable into a list

```dart
...list
// Example:
[a, ...[b, c], d, e]
```
- 'unwraps' a list (inside of a list) onto the outer one; the output from the example
  is: `[a, b, c, d, e]`

#### 1.4.2 Maps
Maps are hash tables allowing a `key`/`value` pairing (like Python dictionnaries).

##### Defining a Map

```dart
{1: 'this', 2: 'is', 3: 'a', 4:'map'}
```
- Defines a Map with four key values

##### Map functions
```dart
map.length;
```
- returns the length of the map (number of keys)

## 2 - Useful predefined functions
```dart
main()
```
- the `main()` function is a special function in Dart, it will always be executed at
  the start of our script. Defining it allows to have some code always run once the
  script is run (useful, for example, to run a Flutter app)

```dart
print()
```
- prints the contents of what is inside

## 3 - Logic statements in `Dart`
### `if` statements
If statements in `Dart` follow a very similar syntax as Javascript.
```dart
if(bool){ 
// statement(s) executed if the Boolean expression is true. 
} else { 
// statement(s) executed if the Boolean expression is false. 
} 
```
- definition of an `if` statement in dart

## 4 - Defining functions in `Dart`
### 4.1 Functions with name
```dart
void myfunction(int num1, int num2) {
    print(num1 + num2);
}
```
- defines a function called `myfunction` that prints the sum of the two inputs of the
  function

> Note1:  it is key to introduce a `;` after each line of code inside the function

> Note2: Dart becomes a dynamic language if no datatype is specified in the argument.
> In our case, both `int`s are specified: Dart will raise an error if we enter any
> other data type such as `String` or `float` (it becomes static).

> Note3: the `void` statement specifies the type of output of the function defined

(`Dart` will return an error if this is not followed). In the above case, the function
does not return anything, therefore the type is `void`. It would work without it, but
it is clearer and a better practice if we explicitely mention what we expect.

Following the above example, we could use define the function below (very similar, but
this time it returns the sum instead of printing it in the console).

```dart
double myfunction(double num1, double num2) {
    return num1 + num2;
}
```
- this function will return a `float` number as a result
    
##### Anonymous functions
Anonymous functions are useful to define an action 'on the fly'. Sometimes `Dart` (and
`Flutter` when we define the action a button needs to do) require function pointers to
perform the action. In those cases, we can either define a named function and pass the
unexecuted pointer, OR define an anonymous function directly on the function entry
(useful if we just need the function one time).

Example of anonymous funtion (following above example):

```dart
(num1, num2) => num1 + num2
```
- this is called an 'anonymous' function, (similar to lambda expressions), it generates
  a function object but does not save it into memory (it is usable once). This
  expression is called 'arrow' function.

```dart
(num1, num2) {
    num1 + num2
}
```
- Alternative syntax t define an 'anonymous' function

Note: arrow functions are unexecuted always, we need to add parenthesis to execute them:
```dart
(num1, num2) {
    num1 + num2
}()
```
- the code above executes the function (not very useful)
