# Object Oriented programming in Dart

As an Object-Oriented programming language, all variables in `Dart` are classes.
This document explains how new classes can be defined and used.
# 1 - Defining a class

```dart
class Person {
    String name = 'Default';
    var age = 28;
}
```
- the code above defines a class `Person` with two predefined attributes; this
  attributes will be available to query using `<instanceName>.<variableName>`.

We can now create a new instance of the class `Person`:
```dart
var person1 = Person();
```
- defines `person1`, which is an instance of the class `Person`. Since no data was
  instroduced, the data stored in `person1` is the default one.

# 2 - The class constructor

The constructor is a special method ran automatically every time a class is
instantiated. It is called a 'constructor' since it conglomerates all the
computations required for the class to exist (mandatory inputs, initial variables,
etc.).

Important note: in `Dart`, the constructor of the class is a special method that
takes the same name of the class itself (that is the way that `Dart` will identify
the constructor). The arguments we add in the constructor will be required for the
class to initialize (`Dart` will throw an error otherwise).

## 2.1 'Long' and explicit definition

Following our previous example, the class `Person` will require a `Person()`
constructor. 

```dart
class Person {
    String name;
    int age;

    Person(String inputName, int age) {
        this.name = inputName;
        this.age = age;
    }
}
```
- the code above defines an empty class requiring two inputs to initialize.

> Note: before using any variable in the contrustor, we need to initialize it first
> within the class (as we do above with `String name;` and `int age`).

> Note 2: we use the keyword `this` to refer to the argument '`age`' of the class
> `Person()`, which is set equal to the second argument of the constructor also called
> '`age`'. (This is avoidable using another name for the argument of the constructor,
> as we do with `name`).

## 2.2 'Short' syntax

The same functionality we wrote above can be written using the following code:

```dart
class Person {
    String name;
    int age;
    
    Person(this.name, this.age);
}
```
- this code defines an empty class requiring two arguments to initialize. This syntax
  is an in-built shortcut to build the class easily (the constructor understands that
  `this.name` and `this.age` are instantiated in the constructor).

Now that we have created a class, we can define an instance as follows:

```dart
person1 = Person('Manu', 28);
```
- creates an instance of the `Person` class.

## 2.3 Utility constructors

Utility constructors enable shortcuts to create class instances easily.
This is useful if we need many instances of the same class with very similar
proprieties.

For example, we can enable the `Person` class to create instances needing only one
of the constructor arguments:

```dart
class Person {
    String name;
    int age;
    Person(this.name, this.age);

    Person.newBorn(this.name) {
    age = 0;
    }
}
```
- The above code defines a `newBorn` method, which allows instantiating a `Person`
  with only its name.

Now, we can create a `Person` instance:

```dart
baby = Person.newBorn('Eve')
```

## 2.4 Constructor arguments

In dart, we can use `{}` to make the arguments non-positional (the keyword will be
required when creating an instance). Adding `{}` also makes the arguments optional.

> Note: we can use the `@required` keyword to make an argument mandatory. The
> constructor will throw an Error if the argument required is not defined.

Example use of `{}`:

```dart
class Person {
    String name;
    int age;

    Person({this.name = 'Default', @required this.age}) {
    }
}
```

Now we need to use the below syntax (specifying the names) to create an instance:

```dart
person1 = Person(name: 'Manu', age: 28);
```

# 3 - The `this` statement

The `this` statement is a borrowed idea from Javascript. `this` stands for 'whatever is
responsible from calling the code'. In the above example, since the `Person` class
instance is responsible of calling the `Person()` constructor, `this` will pointed to
the `Person` class instance (therefore, calling `this.name` will be the same as calling
`person1.name`).

More on JavaScript's `this` statement on
[this other post I made](https://github.com/lombardero/cheatsheets/blob/master/4-javascript/2-objects-js.md#23-the-this-statement).

# 4 - Making classes private

In dart, adding an `_` before the class name will make the class private; no other files
will be able to use or import that class. 

Example of a private class:
```dart
class _Person {
    ...
}
```

Main reason why it is a good idea to define private elements:
- Private classes and methods ensure that particular pieces of code are not used
  elsewhere, allowing developers to make changes to that method without affecting
  other parts of the code.
