# FLUTTER WIDGETS

Check flutter's [widget catalog](https://flutter.dev/docs/development/ui/widgets).

Widgets are the building blocks of Flutter Apps. Anything that can
be seen in an App is a Widget (even what holds all widgets 
together). Some can define large scale parts of the application
(Bars, Images, Lists, Buttons...), and some other can
define very simple elements such as text. The app is built by
interconnecting and adding widgets onto each other to for the
widget tree, which adds the complexity.

> Note: widgets are classes in Dart.

> Good practice: one widget per file. (helps performance and readability).

> Key shortcuts: 
> - press `Ctlr + Space` in VS code to see the arguments
> - use `Alt + Shift + F` to auto-format the code
> - Use `^ Shift R` to make Refactor suggestions

# Eidgets

```dart
void main() {
  runApp(MyWidget());
}
```
- this code uses the `runApp()` function, which is a Flutter function that basically
  generates the UI from the whole widget tree defined in the Widget `MyWidget()`.

> Note: it calls the 'build' method defined on the 'Widget' class, and builds the
> visualisation.

```dart
void main() => runApp(MyWidget());
```
- does the same as the code above, in one line of code (different and often used syntax)

## Extending classes

Extensions are used to build widgets from Flutter's pre-defined
objects. To define a widget we need to extend the StatelessWidget
or StatefulWidget class, and override its 'build' function'.

```dart
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
```
- This Command imports all Classes defined in the `material.dart` file (which is in the
  folder where Flutter is downloaded). The yaml file declares the dependencies, and
  here we bring out the widgets from this file, which we can then use to extend our
  own classes

## Stateless widgets

For Stateless widgets, we need to import or extend only one class

```dart
class MyWidget extends StatelessWidget {
  // all class variables and functions used on the code go here

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return MaterialApp(home: Text('Hello world!'));
  }
}

```
- The can be re-used later (careful, in this example we are using a tateless Widget,
  therefore it cannot change; it does not usually need functions
  or variables since it is stateless)


```dart
@override
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
  return MaterialApp(home: Text('Hello world!'));
  }
}
```
- this statement allows us to create a new class `MyWidget`, built from `StatelessWidget` (the most basic Flutter widget).

> Note 1: Stateless Widgets can only change once input data (from outside the class) is inserted. It does not keep internal state, and therefore will never get re-rendered based on state.

> Note 2: the `@override` decorator is there to make our code more readable (good practice). It is a Flutter decorator that says we are `overriding` or `re-writing` any of the in-built functions of the 'StatelessWidget' class (in this case, the `build()` function). Flutter actually forces us to override it, so it is not required (code would still work) but it adds readability (make sure we are not accidentally overriding)

> Note 3: `StatelessWidget` needs us to define the `build()` function to work (which is called by Flutter when the Widget is loaded).

> Note 4: the function `build()`, expects a `context` argument, which is a `BuildContext` class (defined by Flutter), and will return a `Widget` (mentioned before the function name), since it will output something on the UI. `build()` is what will be called to output the UI when `MyWidget` is run.

> Note 5: `MaterialApp` is a Google pre-defined widget (accepts args), which requires us to define the argument `home` to be run. `home` expects a Widget too. In this case, we will put some text.

## Stateful widgets

For stateful widgets, we need to create and import from `material.dart`
TWO defined classes: the `StatefulWidget` AND its State. The `State` class
will keep the state stored. We need to connect both StatefulWidget and
state together as follows:

```dart
class MyWidget extends StatefulWidget {
  @override
  State<StatefulWidget> createState() {
    return _MyWidgetState();
  }
}
```
- We first define the StatefulWidget class, and override its State
  class by returning 'MyWidgetState()' executed with the `createState()`
  method, which outputs a State object: `State<StatefulWidget>`

> Note: this class will return the State of the Widget, which will ask the app to be re-rendered every time the setState() function is required to be run.

```dart
class _MyWidgetState extends State<MyWidget> {
  var var_used_in_state = 0;

  void function_modifying_state() {
    setState(() {
    _var_used_in_state = _var_used_in_state + 1;
  })
  };

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    ....
  }
}
```
- In the State part, we need to add a pointer to the `MyWidget` widget
  by adding `<MyWidget>` after extending the State class: it is extending
  the State of MyWidget.
- In the State definition, we need to add the variables and functions 
  that will affect our state so that flutter knows WHEN it needs to
  re-render the App (otherwise it would be super slow, re-rendering
  anytime the user inputs something.
- The rest of the application is kept inside the State class

> Note0: `setState()` is a method that takes in a void function as an argument,
> holding State-modifying variables on it. When `setState()`
> is called, it will e-run the `build()` method on the widget that called
> it (only that one). When a function modifying a state is required, `setState()` needs
> to be called inside of it. 
> In our example, every time the 'function_modifying-state' is called, the `setState()`
> function will be called too, and the widget it affects will be re-rendered with the
> new state.

> Note1: it is recommended to name the `State` classes and variables with an `_` before
> its name to make them private (non-accessible by other files -> protection from bugs) 

> Note2: it is recommended to keep all state-depending variables on the main dart file.

# Importing stuff

## Importing variables from other files

```dart
import './other_widget.dart';
```
- This allows us to import widgest from other files (note that
    `./` means 'current directory').


```dart
class DependingWidget extends StatelessWidget {
  final String text_that_can_change;

  DependingWidget(this.text_that_can_change);

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Text(text_that_can_change)
  }
}
```
- This is a stateless widget that gets build with some out
  information. This is used when dealing with user names or
  tiny parts of the app that will be changed depending on one
  parameter (example: 'Welcome again: <username>'). You do
  not want to keep the <username> as state or re-render the
  Widget many times.

> Note0: we need to define as properties (class variables) all
> variables we will use on the class. It is good practice to
> use the 'final' statement, which tells the class that the
> value of that variable will not change after the class
> constructor (function with same name as Class) is called.

> Note1: we need to add the property added inside the constructor
> of the class to 'tie' its dependency to it.

## Importing functions

The same way variables can be imported, functions can also be imported by
passing a pointer to the (non-executed) function.

```dart
import './other_widget.dart';

class DependingWidget extends StatelessWidget {
  final Function function_affecting_widgt;

  DependingWidget(this.function_affecting_widgt);

  @override
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return Container(
      child: RaisedButton(onPressed: function_affecting_widgt,)
    )
  }
}
```
- This code allows us to have multiple buttons with different
  constructed in out 'main' folder

```dart
void whateverFunction1() {
  function
}
void whateverFunction2() {
  function
}
DependingWidget(whateverFunction1)
DependingWidget(whateverFunction2)
```
- Will render two `DependingWidgets` with two different functions defined.
