# Classes in Python

Classes allow to create 'groupings' of data, which can be used to ease and structure our code.

## 1 - Defining and initializing a class
### 1.1 The `__init__` function
A class gets created once we use the `class` keyword. We can then start defining functions. Let's see the following example:
```python
class NameClass:
    def __init__(self, first, second):
        self.variable1 = first
        self.variable2 = first*second
```
In the code above, we have created a class named `NameClass`; the code is split on the following lines:
- `class NameClass:` defines the class (creates a pointer to the name), that way, every time we run `NameClass(first, second)` we will create an instance of the class.
- `def __init__(self, first, second):` defines the `__init__` method, which is a 'special' function in python. `__init__` is a 'constructor' function, and will automatically get called when the class is created. Usually, it allows us to instantiate (save in memory) some variables that will be useful for us in the future. Note that all arguments entered on `__init__` (apart from `self`) are the required arguments for the class to initiate.
- `self.variable1 = first` will initiate a variable associated to the class, such as when `<instance-name>.variable1` is ran, the value associated (in this case, `first`) will be returned.

Note: all class methods and variable definitions require the use of the keyword `self`. In python, `self` is the class instance itself, and it is required as an argument to bind it to the variables and functions defined.

### 1.2 Defining class methods
Apart from `__init__`, we can define custom methods for the class, that can be called using `<instance-name>.method()`.

For example:
```python
class Rectangle:
    def __init__(self, length, width):
        self.length = length
        self.width = width

    def area(self):
        return self.length * self.width
```
- The class `Rectangle` has two class methods returning the value of the area and perimeter of it. That way, for an instance `a = Rectangle(3,4)`, `a.area()` will return `12`.

### Checking if a class instance is indeed an instance of a specific class
```python
isinstance(instance, NameClass)
```
- Will return `True` if `instance` is an instance of class `NameClass` (note that the result will still be `True` if `NameClass` is a parent of the class the `instance` is an instance from).

## 2 - Class inheritance
### Defining 'child' classes
Thanks to class inheritance, a second class (or child class) based on a parent class can be created using the `super()` function. See `super()`'s documentation [here](https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#super).

Let's illustrate it with an example. This will be our parent class:
```python
class Rectangle:
    def __init__(self, length, width):
        self.length = length
        self.width = width

    def area(self):
        return self.length * self.width

    def perimeter(self):
        return 2 * self.length + 2 * self.width
```
- The `Rectangle()` class is created.

Now, let's create a subclass of `Rectangle()`: `Square()`, which has the same characteristics, but with one restriction: the width is equal to the length. We can easily create a subclass `Square()` with the predefined `Rectangle()`, class using `super()`.

This is our 'child' class:
```python
class Square(Rectangle):
    def __init__(self, length):
        super(Square, self).__init__(self, length, length)
```
- The code above creates `Square()`, with the same methods as `Rectangle()` available to it.

Notes on the code above:
- `class Square(Rectangle):`: we must add a pointer to the parent class for the child class to understand what class it is inheriting from.
- `def __init__(self, length):` initiates the square class.
- `super(Square, self).__init__(self, length, length)`, 'copies' the functionalities and executes the constructor of the parent class in the child class. From now on, all methods of the parent class are available to the child one. Note that `super()`(without arguments) would work as well, however it is good practice to include the pointers as we did above.

Now, if we define `a = Square(3)`, we can run `a.area()` and we will get `9`.

### Checking if a class is parent of another
```python
issubclass(Class1, Class2)
```
- Will return `True` if `Class1` is a subclass (a 'child') of `Class2`. 

Example: `issubclass(Square, Rectangle)` will return `True` 
