# 1.1 - JAVASCRIPT BASICS

This document is a quick introduction the Javascript very basics, such as defining variables, computing simple operations, and simple syntax such as defining functions and logic statements.

## 1.1.1 The Javascript Very Basics
### 1.1.1.1 Variables
Javascript has two groups of variable types, primitive values and reference values.

#### Primitive value types
Primitive value types consist of variables consisting of a single value (as opposed as objects, which can be large chunks of data). Because they are small, they are directly stored on the Stack. That means each time a variable is defined, the Stack will create a new instance and copy the variable over in another location of the stack. 

The primitive data types are:
- `number`: all numeric variables `integer`, `float`
- `string`: any succession of characters, defined between single or double quotes: `'this is a string'``
- `boolean`: a binary classification: either `True`, or `1`, or `False`, or `0`
- `null`: an empty variable
- `undefined`: a Javascript data type that flags that the variable does not have a defined value
- `symbol`: a Javascript data type that creates a unique value every time the function `Symbol()` is called (used as an identifier). 

#### Reference value types
Reference value types are used for larger and more complex 'chunks' of data such as objects (they can contain any type of data such as a series of primitive types such as an array of numbers, or even reference types such as an array of arrays). Because of their size, they cannot be stored on the Stack directly, instead, the Stack will save a pointer to a location in the Heap, where the actual data inside the object will be stored.

The reference value types are:
- `object`: any type of data 'building block' of data holding values (can be primitive or referenced). Example: `array` and `dictionnaries`.

Note: this value type can cause confusions. Since what is stored is a pointer to the Heap location where the data is stored, once we define an array (for example, `array = [1,2,3]`) and we make a copy of that array (for example, `array2 = array`), what is copied over is the pointer to the same location on the Heap where the data is stored. That way, following our example, if we set `array = [1,1,1]`, the value of `array2` will also be updated to `[1,1,1]`, since both arrays will point to the same.

##### Arrays
Arrays are lists of any type of variable (such as lists of numbers, strings, arrays, or a combination of all)

Example of an array:
```Javascript
var arr = ['im a string' ,1234, ['list','of','things']]
```

##### Dictionnaries
Dictionnaries are an optimized format (hash table) to retrieve data using a key, which can be anything we define.
```Javascript
var obj = {
                    'key1': 'hello',
                    34: 42,
                    'key3': ['im', 'an', 'array']
                }
```

### 1.1.1.2 Basic syntax
#### Comments
- `//`: single line Comment
- `/*` multi line Comment (needs to be closed with the mirror operator `*/`)

#### Numeric operators
- `+`, `-`, `*`: sum, substraction, multiplication
- `=`: assign value
- `+=`, `-=`, `*=`, `/=`: adds, substracts, multiplies, or divides the operator by a value and re-assigns it
- `<var>++, <var>--`: adds one or substracts one to the variable

#### Boolean operators
- `a == b`: returns `True` if `a = b` without being strict on the value type (for example, the statement `3 == '3'` will return `True`)
- `a === b`: returns `True` if `a = b` when `a` and `b` have the same value type (this time, the statement `3 ==='3'` will return `False`)
- `a != b`: returns `True` if `a` is different from `b`, not being strict on value types (the opposite of the operator `==`)
- `a !== b`: returns `True` if `a` is different from `b`, or both are different value types  (the opposite of the operator `===`)
- `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`: compares numbers in a loose way (does not care of type)
- `a && b`: computes a AND b
- `a || b`:  computes a OR by

#### Defining variables
Defining a variable in Javascript will allocate a slot in the Stack to store the value of the variable directly (if variable is primitive) or a pointer to a Heap location (if variable is of reference type). We do so through the `var` statement, as shown below

The basic syntax to define a variable in Javascript is:
```Javascript 
var variable_name = 'variable_value';
```

#### Defining global variables
Global variables will be accessible in the whole code (even inside functions), and considered a 'Global constant' in all the code. They are defined using the `const` statement. Note that the convention states that global variable names are in caps, and use underscores as separations.

The basic syntax to define a Global variable in Javascript is:
```Javascript 
const GLOBAL_VARIABLE = 'variable_value';
```

### 1.1.1.3 Basic operations
#### Querying data type
```Javascript 
typeof variable_name;
```
- returns a string with the variable type of `variable_name`

#### Requesting an input
```Javascript 
new_variable = prompt("Tell me the new variable");
```
- when run, will request a user input, and set the value to `new_variable`(same as `input()` in Python)

#### Printing results
```Javascript 
console.log(variable);
```
- prints the contents of `variable` in the console (same as `print()` in Python)

```Javascript 
alert(message);
```
- will pop out an alert box to warn the user of the `message` that was introduced

#### Numeric operations
```Javascript 
number.toFixed(n);
```
- prints the numeric variable `number` as a string with `n` numbers after the comma

```Javascript 
String(34);
```
- returns the numeric value as a sting

#### String operations
```Javascript 
string.length;
```
- returns the string length (number of characters)

```Javascript 
string.toUpperCase();
```
- returns a copy of the string in upper case (does not modify the value of the variable `string`)

```Javascript 
Number('34');
```
- returns the numeric string as a number data type

#### Array operations
```Javascript
array[n_idx];
```
- returns the variable stored in the `n_idx` index in the array

```Javascript
array.length;
```
- returns the length (number of elements) of the array

#### Dictionnary operations
```Javascript
obj['key1'];
// or alternatively: 'key1'.obj;
```
- retrieves the data stored in `'key1'` of the dictionnary `obj`.


## 1.1.2 Conditional statements in Javascript
To define conditional statements in Javascript, we us what in Javascript is defined a 'block', which delimits the code affected by a statement. Blocks are used to delimit the code of functions as well. Blocks are delimited by brackets: `{...}`.

### 1.1.2.1 `if` statements
#### Basic `if` statements
If statements are defined with a boolean condition, and perform a series of computations if that statement is true.
```Javascript
if (<Bool> condition) {
    // <computation if Bool == True;
}
```
#### Multiple conditions
In case there are multiple conditions, the statements `else if` and `else` can be used to check for further conditions if the boolean of preceding statements is not True.
```Javascript
if (<Bool> condition1) {
    computation1 // if condition1 == True;
} else if (<Bool> condition 2) {
    computation2 // if condition2 == True;
} else {
    computation3 // if previous conditions are not True;
}
```

#### Switching between values of a variable
In case the different computations depend on the value of a variable, we can use the `switch()` statement, as follows:
```Javascript
switch(a){
    case k:     //if a == k
    computation_if_k
    break;
    case n:    //if a == n
    computation_if_n
    break;
    }
```
### 1.1.2.1 `while` statements
While statements have two syntaxes in Javascript, depending on how we want our code to behave.

If we want to first verify a condition, and then do a computation, we must use the `while` statement at the beginning as shown below:
```Javascript
while (<Bool> condition) {
    computation; // computation done as long as condition == True
    }
```
Note that a `break` statement can be used inside the `while` loop to stop it.

If we want to perform a computation, then do a verification to see if the loop mus continue, we must use the `do` statement first, followed by a `while` statement, as shown below:
```Javascript
do {
    computation; // computation is done always; another iteration will be done if condition == True
} while (<Bool> condition)
```

### 1.1.2.1 `for` statements
`for` loops require three arguments to run: the start of the iteration, a boolean condition ('do another iteration until the condition is `False`), and the step definition. An example is shown below:
```Javascript
for (var i=0, i<=9, i +=1) {
    computation; // computation is done for every i until the loop ends
}
```

## 1.1.3 Defining Functions in Javascript
Functions are objects that perform a series of isolated computations whenever they are called. They can take (or not) variables as inputs, which will then be used inside of the function to compute a result.

Notes on functions:
- functions are 'isolated' statements, meaning that once run, they will make a copy of their input variables, perform the computations stated, and return something if asked.
- functions can only access their input variables. The variable names used as inputs will be valid only within the function
- global variables (defined with `const`) are an exception of the above statement; they can be accessed by functions without needing to be inserted as arguments.
- functions defined inside another function can access any variable defined in the first function.

Example 1:
```Javascript
function newFunction() {
    var function_variable = 1; // this will belong only to the function
    computation
}
```

Example 2:
```Javascript
function newFunction(input_variable) {
    computation;
    return input_variable; // this will be returned by the function
}
```